Severe burns may involve all of the organs which lead to a series of pathophysiological process resulting in mortality. The clinicians are acknowledging the importance of predicting mortality to increase the survival. The pathophysiology of burn is characterized by the inflammatory reaction resulting in serious complication. The red cell distribution width (RDW) is one of the component of complete blood cell count which is recently studied by various medical field for its ability as an indicator of systemic inflammation and as a predictor of mortality. Recently, machine learning model has gained attention for the diagnostic and prognostic performance that automatically build analytical models to predict postoperative mortality. Therefore, the author evaluated the risk factors including RDW that predict mortality in patients after burn surgery and also evaluated the clinical features to establish 90-day mortality prediction model using machine learning technique.
The author evaluated the RDW and other perioperative characteristics as risk factors for mortality prediction in patients after burn surgery. Also, these risk factors were analyzed using machine learning technique to evaluate the prediction ability of different machine learning models.
The preoperative clinical features including laboratory findings and basic characteristics of patients were collected. Risk factors for mortality after burn surgery were evaluated using univariate and multivariate logistic regression analyses. In addition, the incidence of postoperative acute kidney injury (AKI) was evaluated. A receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis of the preoperative RDW was performed. The 90-day mortality rate was analyzed using the Kaplan-Meier survival analysis with a log-rank test to compare the survival rate after the burn surgery. The hazard ratio of mortality in RDW groups by the cutoff value was analyzed using Cox proportional-hazards regression. Also, clinically important features for predicting mortality in patients after burn surgery were selected using a random forest regressor. The author evaluated the area under the ROC curve (AUC) and classifier accuracy to compare the predictive accuracy of prediction by machine learning algorithms including random forest, adaptive boosting, decision tree, linear support vector machine, and logistic regression.
This study reveals that preoperative RDW could have the ability to predict 90-day mortality in patients after burn surgery. Furthermore, in patients with high RDW prior to burn surgery, postoperative AKI increases the mortality rate further. Therefore, patients with high RDW before burn surgery should be aware of the development of postoperative AKI. Also, this study demonstrated that the most significant predictors for mortality after burn surgery are TBSA burned, RDW, and age. Random forest showed the best performance for predicting mortality among other models.
